Jacaranda 
SOTtWare 









Jacaranda Wiley Ltd 
65 Park Road, 
Milton, Qld. 4064 


ABOUT THE PROGRAM 


Goldfields is an historical simulation that provides students with 
opportunities to learn about and explore the possibilities of life in the 
goldrushes of the nineteenth century, as well as developing reading 
and language skills. Students can discover that there was a lot more 
to life in a goldrush than simply digging for gold! 

The object is to gain as much money, gold and experience as 
possible in a year on the goldfields. The player can become, among 
other things, a wagoner, market gardener, councillor, doctor, miner 
or criminal, and may have any number of adventures. The flexibility 
of the simulation allows the player's success to be entirely 
dependent on their ingenuity and persistence, as was the case in 
real life. The large range of activities means that Goldfields can be 
played any number of times by the same student(s). 

The Goldfields package includes the Goldfields Journal, which is 
designed for use as resource and research material, and gives a 
wealth of background information essential for success. A certificate 
can be printed at the end of the adventure as evidence of the 
player’s level of success. The game can be stopped at any stage 
and saved to disk. Goldfields can be used by individuals or small 
groups of students from 11 years of age onwards. 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Trevor Jacob was a teacher of social studies, geography and 
history, with special interests in simulation and gaming strategies. 
He decided that many simulations would be easier to implement in 
classrooms if they were presented on computer, where students can 
choose their own paths, rather than as board games. Trevor is also 
interested in writing historically based children’s books. He now 
works for the Education Department of Western Australia, producing 
educational films and television programmes. 

David Smith, a designer and programmer of great experience and 
flair, has worked with the author to create the final program. 


© Trevor K. Jacob 1986 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior 
permission of the publisher. 


- — 


SPI2l}PIO5 





gqooer *y J0Aal] 


BIVMIOS BpuLiLoORL 


