we On dp 
A Guide to Prospective | 
Gold Seekers 


Dd _ . 
Pere ean 


we ; ted a q , x \ >? ce a. 
y /\reas FLOR 
( ci INVee a # 


| ary T) 
» J x ft it e 
es BY 
7 Sd 


NICHOLAS JACOB ROWE 


recently returned from the Gold 
Rushes at Fields Town, Goldfields &c, &c. 








(The French 
measures of length 
and weight are included for 
the benefit of French immigrants.} 





Price — Six pence 


1854 
SUZE PORT HOUSE 
| ° PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS 
Main Street, Suze Port* 
“© Trevor K. Jacob 1986 



























aR yeti: Fe Dag? teed os Saal 


Pr a?" a? 
alata a * 3o? 
us rere iter e a 


ge 












iT - F is ~~ P 
= pattie. gl oe — | 
- a > Cee ] rar es - eget et _e » 
SS ee” pee, te — | 
‘ Z a ¥ e ; a 
- — - Ale 4 ™ ~ a ~ ; 
? A lee "a . —- - 
‘ ‘ mm” : ry 


‘—_ oe 


Lad 
n 






4 
? “ 


— 9 . y eh a j : 
eth s jee"; TT? ie 4 lw 
~# ahihg s f 3 —— = wre . a af” : : ‘ | 
rd a a ee et ia * % ik 
a eee {iw 4 “s..8 — ae re P 
. fs iets a a 


4 















4 


wae 4, » @ 


P i] - .. a « j 
? 4 ‘} 4 ae Py . 7 - 
a — . yt ao 
‘es . a ® 
3 —- y ign SAYA 
' he , 4 P i" : * 4 
b 1 ‘ 4 
, ao t. el 
ae 4 by ae o — 
. si J] s ¥ 1 ' » 4 
r oe ’ é 
7 } DB a @ * SS , , »* e 
if _ ‘La i J supe 
Bs ’ - ee . ‘A 
hale ie es a ‘ en ool af "vs 
4 é ¥ n 
“ah ; . ft) : y ? W ¥ 
: " > 
cat » 4 "se ans : 
« oo 
- ’ re > 


ad ‘s - 


, . » dag pee + a 


ow sa += 
. \ aa » . 
& 
a 
’ 
= 4 
* 


Tt 
. 
¥ 
+ 





Contents 


New Arrivals 

suze Port 

Lodgings 

Town Outskirts 

"New Chums” 

The Angus Gazette 
Weather 

Information for Travellers 
Walking to the Fields 
Travelling by Wagon 
Horses 

Licences and Licence Dodging 
Bushrangers 

The Mining Camps 
Fields Town 

Briggs’ Store 

The Hospital 

Health 

Accidents 

Exchanging Gold 

The Bank of Australasia 
Cobb & Co. 

Life in the Camps 
Pegging a Claim 

How to Pan for Gold 
Operating a Cradle 
Long Toms 

Puddling 

Reef Gold 

Operating a Shaft 
Dryblowing in Desert Areas 
Big Mines 

Town Councils 

Crime and Grog Shops 
Goldfields Women 
Chinese 

Squatters 

Are You a Miner? 


WWOONN DAF WWNNH NH KF & 


New Arrivals 


The Anna entered the harbour, edging among a host of other vessels, 
a forest of masts and rigging rising above the water. We leant over 
the rails to glimpse the land of fortune. Stunted forest with leaves of 
dreary, grey-green spread down to the sandy coast. The land shim- 
mered in the sun, and the smell of eucalypt came to meet us. Nothing 
could be more different to the ordered hedgerows, fields and gardens 
of England. 

When the Anna docked, we stepped onto a crowded jetty. The wharf 
was jammed with carters, all competing to carry our baggage. The 
place is rough and ready, hastily built with no planning; a ramshackle 
mixture of storage sheds, shops and shelters spreads along the beach, 
with only a few brick and stone houses. It is easy to imagine how small 
and sleepy the port was before gold was found and the rush began. 


Suze Port 


All the gold miners disembark here at Suze Port. It is full of 
immigrants and fortune hunters — a great variety of characters, all 
going to the diggings, quite a few intent on preying on others. Word 
has it that normally sensible townsfolk are leaving their jobs and, gold 
mad, are heading off, even those who have never held anything heavier 
than a goose-quill! 

Ships’ masters cannot keep their crews. The sailors desert and head 
for the diggings, leaving ships stranded in the harbour. The local paper 
reported that the ship Tulloch Castle was short-handed and “If any crew 
will return to their ship’s duties, no proceedings will be taken against 
them, and they will receive their normal wages for the voyage to 
Bombay." And sailors have always been whipped or executed for 
desertion! 

Suze Port is busy; there is plenty of work for those who stay, and, 
because workers are scarce, the wages are good. However, with news 
of “big finds” arriving every day, the inhabitants are tempted away. 
One day the place may develop into an important town, but, for the 
moment, it exists only for gold. 

It is a boom town with dirty and unlit streets (or, rather, winding 
dirt tracks). The new buildings are badly built, and advertise their 
owners’ wares with flimsy garish signs — importers, lawyers, printers, 
banks, shops and inns. The crowded streets are cluttered by horses 
hitched to wooden railings. In winter, the ground is mud — carts, 
horses and people churn and skid their way from wharf to town, con- 


d 


tinually turning the soil until it is like a ploughed field. In summer 
it becomes ankle-deep, choking dust. 


Lodgings 


Lodgings are scarce. There were no beds at the inn for us, at least 
none that we could afford. For ten shillings we could sleep in a com- 
munal room — a depressing first night! The room was a stuffy dormi- 
tory crowded with flea-ridden stretchers occupied by all sorts of 
people. There were new arrivals with shiny boots and starched shirt 
collars that stuck out from beneath the old blankets. Alongside were 
diggers, some in a drunken sleep, most dressed in lairy red, gold and 
striped shirts. 

Some lodgings are cruder. A few inn-keepers offer stables at five 
shillings a night. If you have nowhere else to go, and it's raining, you 
can pay this and sleep on clean straw, clinging to a borrowed rug. You 
bed down in a stall, sharing it with at least two others, and perhaps 
a horse. 


Town Outskirts 


The goldrush started overnight. No preparation could be made for 
the influx. (The population multiplied more than one hundred times 
in the six months after gold was found.) There are only five law officers 
to keep the peace. A canvas town has sprung up, tent occupants paying 
five shillings a week to rent a patch of land. The hotch-potch homes 
are built from any available materials; some show remarkable inven- 
tiveness — patchwork quilts, aprons, petticoats, blankets and ship's 
sails, anything that might keep out the elements. Crude signs and flags 
are used to advertise blacksmiths, butchers, doctors and tea-rooms. 
Occupants cook outside the entrances and rubbish lies about, 
uncollected, trampled into the mud by the traffic, ultimately rotting 
and stinking. The tent city is illegal and unhealthy, but what can be 
done about it? If one area is cleared, another takes its place. 


“New Chums” 


Before heading to the diggings you need mining equipment. Also, 
the clothes you wore in an office, for instance, will be no use for 


2 


mining. Prices keep rising all the time, but equipment and supplies 
are much cheaper in Suze Port than at the goldfields. 

Newcomers are everywhere and are scorned by the locals. They are 
called “new chums", and it takes at least three years to become an 
accepted “old chum” in the colony. By this time the men will have 
. sprouted a moustache or beard, have a sun-browned skin, and be 
dressed in a brightly coloured shirt, moleskins and a cabbage-tree hat. 
The women are equally tanned and flamboyant — they also wear some- 
what shorter skirts than in the cities because this keeps the hems out 
of the dirt. 


The Angus Gazette 


This newspaper reports all the news in the Suze Port area and the 
diggings. It also carries stories from other mining areas, some of them 
foreign. 


Weather 


During summer, there are hot winds, choking dust and thousands 
of flies swarming around you. Travellers should take enough water 
to last any journey, or they should know where they can get water 
along the way, since many of the creeks dry up in the hot weather. 
Some travellers, usually footsloggers, have died of thirst. 

The fierce heat will blister a new chum’s skin. If you are not used 
to hard manual work in the open air, you might suffer sun-stroke. 
Hundreds of men and women are blinded with Sandy Blight — an 
eye disease thought to be caused by hot winds blowing dust about. 

In the winter the rains come and it can be bitterly cold. The dusty 
roads become a quagmire. The wagons plough up the track, and the 
poor beasts can wallow knee-deep in mud. Vehicles have been bogged 
for weeks; sometimes three teams of bullocks are needed to pull them 
from mud-holes. You are likely to see horses coated with mud to their 
girths, and footsore travellers sliding along behind in the oozing muck. 
. Flooding is another danger. Flash floods at river crossings or in gul- 
lies can wash away men and beasts with little warning. In the rivers 
and creeks there are areas of quicksand. Most of these are unmarked 
and are terribly dangerous. 

Try to avoid quicksand and mud-holes at all costs, thus saving your- 
self precious time, and, more importantly, your livestock. 


3 


Information for Travellers 


The roads to the diggings are bad, summer or winter. They are unlike 
the carriageways of England, being raw dirt tracks that wind through 
the bush, following the paths forced by the first diggers. Of course, 
the convenience of travelling by modern steam locomotives is 
unknown here. There are no railway tracks in the interior of the 
colony, although I[ have heard talk of a line being built in Melbourne. 

There are two main tracks to the goldfields; Trickey’s Track is the 
better and more popular of these. The shorter route is down the Pass 
Road, but few travellers choose it because the surface is more difficult 
for all forms of transport and the track is thus more isolated. 

The main track is always crowded, and is further cluttered by broken 
vehicles abandoned along the way. Often you'll see exhausted men 
and women lying on the. edge of the track, unable to finish their 
journey. Fellow travellers are so lost with gold fever that they won't 
stop to help anyone; even those with room on their drays just keep 
going. It is like a mob of refugees fleeing a battlefield. 

The Angus reported one great jam of traffic, which occurred where 
the Pass Road leaves Trickey's Track and heads south-east. “Dozens 
of drays and thousands of miners waited, making final preparations 
and deciding which route to take. Mixed amongst the bunch were ele- 





Figure 1: The road to the diggings 


4 


Bole 3y} jo dew y :z oin3I1y 


SaUIOIPT O98 O09 OF Te O duiems F.*] 


— 









JaAly BSS 





| UP SHOUIe UNO! ERS 
com Gea 3 YP@I. JO PROY SquSusTAes fm. + | 


te SS 
CS 
we 


WW) 








sorbic \ REAR cs 


gant gentlemen on fine-boned horses, kilted Scotsmen, runaway sailors 
still wearing their sea-garb, servants and shepherds, immigrants from 
many lands, honest men and cut-throats. Their worldly goods were 
stacked in carts, drays or wheelbarrows, or were strapped to their 
backs, as were their children.” So many villains are drawn here that 
you should be armed. 

Life on the roads is the first taste of the goldfields, the first step 
towards hardship, isolation and privation. Every day fortune hunters 
depart civilisation for a miner's life. Those employed at Suze Port are 
the first to become restless and bored with their jobs. Then it's off to 
the fields, changing their lives completely. Most have no idea what 
they are getting into. 


Walking to the Fields 


Walking is the cheapest way to get there. “Footsloggers” must rea- 
lise how long it will take — the distances are huge compared with 
England and Europe. However, those with little money will choose 
to walk. Thousands of diggers are travelling by foot, although many 
who set out never reach their destination. 





. 5 
- ” é = . 
es; s ; Sy alt : » aes Se 
<5. oe Fae s2t2 é . or, , te x = ae. Se" 5 

: = SF sy aes val e yg sae? $5 Pt) Br wR Roe 

= RS tes ee = # + setae <P eS > $s. « 


Figure 3: On the road with a handcart 


6 


Walkers usually “hump their swags”, their belongings rolled up in 
a blanket and cast across their shoulders. All sorts of contraptions are 
used to push and drag goods. The Angus reported that one group pushed 
handcarts 400 miles (640 kilometres} from Suze Port to places in the 
desert. 


Travelling by Wagon 


Some lucky diggers travel by cart or wagon. It’s not cheap to buy 
one, but many wagon owners are glad to take a few pounds from 
anyone who wants a ride. 

Prepare carefully. Some travellers are stark, staring, gold‘mad and 
head off with nothing. If they don't die on the way, they arrive with 
no tools, money or shelter. Others take too much. Picture two bul- 
lock drays being loaded in Main Street, Suze Port. One hundred people 
are scrambling about, all planning to ride these vehicles to the dig- 
gings. They also have cradles for washing gold, wheelbarrows, dozens 
of tin dishes, beds and assorted boxes, ropes, frying-pans, ovens, 
stretchers, tarpaulins, quart and pint pots, buckets, guns, sieves, picks, 
crowbars, spades, and a host of unseen articles! Beginners who start 
out with too many belongings are often forced to throw them away 
some distance down the road. All sorts of things are to be found along 
the way. Chests of fancy clothes, books, beds, and china basins are 
of little use in the mining areas. A scavenger could sell these in Suze 
Port for a wonderful profit, but few people head away from the fields 
and so the goods lie rotting. 

It is not uncommon to see thirty or more bullocks yoked to a single 
dray. The drivers cajole the beasts along, swearing loudly and cracking 
enormous whips over their heads to force the poor creatures through 
the mud. 


Horses 


Going to the diggings on horseback is the quickest, but horses are 
expensive. It is best to ride one and lead a pack-horse or mule; other- 
wise, you can either carry very little or you walk while the horse 
carries a larger load. 

The dealers will cheat you if have no knowledge of horses. Buy a 
brumby if possible; they are best in drought and areas of scanty forage, 
and can travel hard country and put up with hard times. They will 
find water, sometimes by scratching for it in sandy creek beds. These 
horses are bred in the bush and will not touch poisonous plants. 


7 


Don't use an English saddle; they are too heavy, too smooth and 
too hard on the horse's back. 


Licences and Licence Dodging 


Recently an official advertisement stated “Certain persons have begun 
searching for gold on government land, without the authority to do 
so. Such persons will be prosecuted unless they obtain the necessary 
licence.” It went on to say that a miner's licence must be produced 
any time a policeman or some other person representing the govern- 
ment demanded to see it. Prospective diggers should consider pur- 
chasing one to avoid trouble. 

To mine legally, you must buy this piece of paper, which presently 
costs thirty shillings a month. That is one shilling a day, or eighteen 
pounds a year, when a labourer's wage is five shillings a week, and 
shepherds receive a miserable ten pounds a year! The licence fee will 
probably become even higher. The authorities want to make it so 
expensive that people will be forced back to work in the towns and 
on the land. They think it would be “better for the community” if there 
were no gold mining (except by the big companies) and no gold towns. 
They really mean it would be better for them. The men in authority 
are the rich men, and they hate seeing their cheap labour take off to 
the diggings. 

Writers for The Angus continually question the high price of licences. 
"In Castlemaine, pedestrians must wade deep in mud and water. In 
one accident two drays broke their axle-tree shafts. It took ten men 
standing up to their waists in water several hours to free them. These 
men, furious at the state of the streets, swore never to pay the licence 
again; they said they'd rot in jail first.” It's hard for the government 
to provide amenities for such a quickly growing and widespread com- 
munity, but there'll be rebellion soon unless the licence fee is lowered. 
Murderers go free because of the shortage of law enforcement officers, 
while there are plenty of troopers, many of them brutal, to harry 
miners for their licences. 

Already many miners refuse to pay the licence. Some have made 
an art of hiding during the regular digger hunts. The police continu- 
ally harass the miners, whose discontent is growing all the time. 

An acquaintance of mine was caught by a rough-looking sergeant 
and was marched off to “the logs” (this means being chained to a fallen 
tree) before appearing in court. My mate offered the sergeant a five 
pound note, whereon he was released. A lot of the police are good 
men following orders, but a lot are as corrupt as five-day-old fish. 


8 


Bushrangers 


At first robbers were referred to as highwaymen, but these vagabonds 
hide in the bush waiting for their quarry, so they are called 
“bushrangers’. Some of the robbers are “old lags” or ex-convicts. 
Carry a gun for protection — and make sure it is loaded. The authori- 
ties offer little protection in return for your licence fee, but you can't 
complain about that when you're dead. In the evening, just to warn 
those in nearby camps, you should fire a few shots to empty your gun. 
Then place fresh powder in the chamber. Now all those within hearing 
distance know you are armed and ready to defend yourself. 


The Mining Camps 


Few diggers expect to be at the diggings long, and fewer still think 
that they will have to work hard to make a fortune. Once at the dig- 
gings, a miner might not see a town for weeks or months, sometimes 
years. An unlucky digger is soon reduced to poverty, left to live off 


ea BR 





S a 
Sa 





SS eS 
ae Soe ees 


me Sy REARS 
= > Se 
Teak “SSS 


diggings 


ve Ss 
acnbaneaies me 


Figure 4: A comfortable camp at the 


9 


the land, or forced to return to town to find a job. Many mining camps 
last only as long as the gold; most are destined to become ghost towns. 

In the scattered mining camps around Goldfields -— Damp Camp, 
Snakey Gully and Deep Mountains — the work is tough, but there 
is always a chance to make a fortune. 


Fields Town 


This settlement is the largest in the Goldfields area. Six months ago 
it was a quiet bush valley adjoining Blue River. Now there is a street 
about a mile long and wide enough to turn a bullock team. Briggs Street 
is lined on both sides with buildings that centre around the “Sham- 
rock Hotel" and the other well-established businesses. Most structures 
are hastily built from easily-obtained materials — usually tin and rough- 
hewn wood. Further along all you find are tents. Even the hospital 
is a series of calico tents. 

Other tents belong to store-keepers, butchers, doctors, barbers, 
bankers, smithies, eating houses, refreshment sellers and tradesmen. 
Then a horde of diggers’ tents and hovels spread into the distance. 
Only half the inhabitants are directly involved with digging for gold. 
The rest of the residents supply the miners’ wants, whether these be 
food, supplies, equipment, or refreshments and amusements. More 
and more “paper swells” or “pencil pushers” are attracted to town. These 
clerks work with the police, council offices, banks, legal rooms, 
licensing and claims halls, and so on. 

If you are wondering where to begin to make your fortune, con- 
sider trying short-term work in Fields: Town. Some towns have become 
beacons on maps because of their fabulously rich gold discoveries — 
Ballaarat, Ophir, Turon, Bendigo, Eaglehawk Gully, Echunga, Fingal, 
Maryborough, Hill End, Calliope, Rushworth, Tarrangower, Rocky 
River and so on. All of these held a fortune, at least for the first-comers, 
and the thousands of followers had the dazzling hope before them. 
I wonder if any of these places will be important in the future, after 
the gold is finished? 


Briggs’ Store 
Not everyone digs for gold. Briggs’ Supplies is a gold mine in itself. 


Built on a back section of Fields Town at the end of Briggs Street, the 
store sells anything and everything to diggers and townspeople. It also 


10 





Figure 5: The Briggs’ Express 


runs the Briggs’ Express, a carrier service that transports supplies to 
nearby camps. 

All supplies are expensive. Demand is so great that the supply of 
goods cannot keep up, and the storekeepers can charge what they like. 
The suppliers — food sellers, spirit sellers and those who buy the 
diggers’ gold — are, some say, more likely to make a fortune than the 
diggers. Goods for every need and occasion are for sale — sugar candy, 
potted anchovies, East India Pickles, Venice turpentine, Stephens’ 
Blistering Ointment, linseed oil, spring-carts, waterproof tents, pistols 
and shotguns, Peck Co.'s Superior Flake Chocolate, Laver and Co.'s 
Cordial, biscuits from Simpson and Bell (and some from Peek Freans), 
tin dishes and everything you might need for mining, from a pick to 
a needle. The Angus recently quoted what must be a record sale — 
a miner's pan was selling for £16. 

Bullockies haul the supplies from Suze Port on overloaded drays. 
By the time they finally reach the store, the goods are expensive 
because the freight costs are high. The store might charge 5 shillings 
for a bucket of water, £20 for a hundredweight (50 kilograms) of flour, 
and up to 5 shillings for a 4 pound (1.8 kilogram) loaf of bread. It's 
no wonder that the diggers’ diet consists mainly of tea, mutton and 
damper! 


11 


Anyone who has the capital to start a shop will do well. With a supply 
of boots and shoes, bottled ale, port and sherry, moleskins or picks 
and shovels, you could make a “killing”. 


The Hospital 


The diggers call the hospital in Fields Town “Calico House”. No 
wonder, since it is a collection of tents packed with stretchers on ear- 
then floors. My advice to diggers is not to get sick. 

As you travel around Goldfields, look after your health. Scores of 
people have died from dysentery; other forms of disease are rife, and 
there have been some horrible accidents, so be cautious. Living con- 
ditions are appalling. Damp blankets, shanty houses, poor diets, 
unwashed bodies, lack of water and sanitation all help breed disease. 
Epidemics are common -— typhoid, diphtheria, scarlet fever, whooping 
cough, measles, scurvy and meningitis. Dirty water is a frequent cause 
of sickness, as are the flies. 

The story is the same everywhere, according to The Angus. Nurses 
and doctors are few, and hospitals are even rarer. Often it is left to 
volunteers to care for the needy. A mate of mine considered becoming 
a doctor once; the pay was good but the hours were too long, and one 
would not be free to travel about the fields. Doctors! Most are not at 
all! Beware of tradesmen (butchers and bakers) who charge £10 to 
perform surgery. I would rather be treated by a horse-coper than by 
some of the “doctors” on the diggings. 

I read in the gazette about two well-prepared doctors, both from 
Parramatta. They arrived with a portable hospital, complete with “a 
dozen folded tents, twenty-five collapsible stretchers and fifty coffins 
filled with flour. They sold the flour on the fields for double what they 
paid for it, emptying the containers, which waited to store the next 
items. With so many villains and so much sickness around, the good 
doctors will make money twice over with their coffins.” 

At isolated mining camps like Snakey Gully, the only answer is bush 
medicine. I saw one miner have a gash stitched with a hair from a 
horse's tail, there being nothing else available. 


Health 


Avoid dirty living areas. These contribute most to the death of people 
here. A government official reported that Cromwell must be the dirt- 
lest town in the country. “I have made a general inspection to find 
the most insanitary conditions. Rubbish is cast everywhere; offal and 


12 


scraps are simply thrown down the river bank, creating a most 
revolting stench, especially near the piggeries and cowyards. Mr 
Goodger's yard alone could cause disease and sickness throughout the 
town. Goodness knows how clean the drinking-water is!" 
A recent typhoid epidemic took twenty-two lives at Cromwell. Here 
are the obituaries of one family: 
Matilda Margret Scally — Died 30th April, aged 11 months and 
23 days 
John Scally — Died 27th March, aged 7 years and 3 months 
Mary Scally — Died 2nd April, aged 5 years and 2 months 
Sarah Scally — Died 7th April, aged 6 years and 3 months 
Daniel Scally — Died 7th April, aged 3 years and 7 months 
Ellen Scally (their mother) — Died 1st April, aged 29 years 


Accidents 


Disease kills more people than do accidents, and only rarely is 
anyone killed by bushrangers or natives. Accidents involving cave-ins 
or explosions are usually caused by miners’ carelessness. Otherwise 
accidents are caused by falling trees, snakes, fire in town and scrub, 
or flash flooding (particularly in steep gullies). 

The Blue River has a history of catching miners unprepared, 
demolishing huts and sweeping away cradles. Occasionally miners 
have been swept away and their bodies found downstream days later. 

Landslides and cave-ins occur in shaft mining areas as well as along 
rivers. Take precautions. Avoid cave-ins and flooding by installing 
timber supports and pumps big enough to drain away excess water. 

Do not ignore safety for the lure of gold. Two miners, Iain Campbell 
and John Jones, were about to descend their shaft when Campbell, 
defying mining regulations, asked for a parcel of blasting powder 
weighing about five pounds (2.3 kilograms) to be placed on the plat- 
form on which they would lower themselves. They were down about 
fifteen feet (4.6 metres) when Campbell lit his candle — and the fuse. 
Both men scrambled on to the capstan rope above the bucket. In a 
few moments the powder exploded. . . . Campbell was hurled to the 
bottom of the shaft and killed, while Jones held on and eventually 
recovered in the hospital. 

Not all accidents end in disaster. I heard a tale about three miners 
who had been trying to uncover a quartz reef using explosives. 

They were short of supplies and decided to throw a bomb in a 
waterhole and blow up a catch of fish. They made their “bomb” from 
lots of blasting powder sewn in canvas. 


13 


Somehow their dog got hold of the bomb and dragged its fuse through 
the camp fire. It is not clear what happened next, but there were 
reports of mad panic and a nearby public house nearly being wrecked 
by an explosion. 


Exchanging Gold 


You can swap gold for money or goods almost anywhere, but the 
rates of exchange vary. If you visit the storekeeper's tent in any of 
the camps, you will get much less money for your gold than in a bank. 
Watch how your gold is weighed, check the weights used and look 
carefully at the scales. Even if the exchanger's tools are fair, the rate 
is generally low. It may be worth the trip to Fields Town to swap your 
gold. 

Most miners keep some gold dust or small nuggets to use in emer- 
gencies and sell the rest. The government eventually buys most of 
this gold. 


The Bank of Australasia 


Fields Town's major buildings are the banks. They may not look 
much, but they do a roaring trade. Hordes of diggers come to town 
to exchange their gold. Afterwards they spend up big — gambling and 
carousing, often losing a small fortune overnight. 

Building materials are almost unobtainable in town, although the 
Bank of Australasia has a more substantial look than most buildings. 
There is a glass window looking onto the street and the manager's 
quarters are at the rear. Inside there isa fireplace at one end and the 
manager's bed and the safe are at the other. A few remodelled gin cases 
serve as the banker's desk. 


Cobb & Co. 


Cobb & Co. coaches transport travellers with money, not ordinary 
diggers. They carry the gold from Fields Town to Suze Port, where 
it is shipped overseas. 

I paid for a ride once. The driver was a Yankee, sporting a long whip, 
long pistols, and a long, sharp Bowie knife. He had wild hair and beard 
— the sight of him alone might frighten bushrangers. The team sped 


14 


along with mud flying, stones shying, and diggers scattering and 
cursing as they dodged the heavy wheels. The coach slides across 
swampy patches and bounces over rocky ones equally badly. Three 
small strong boxes sat on the floor between myself and a surly trooper. 
They were empty apart from a few blankets and provisions such as 
horse oats, but on the return journey they would hold a king's ransom. 

Driving the coaches is dangerous and the pay isn't good. Most of 
the drivers are in it for adventure: that's about all you'l get, apart from 
a bruised backside. The escort guards are a useless bunch; they'd be 
very little help if you were bailed up by bushrangers. 


Life in the Camps 


A tent is vital. Some prospectors make do with any kind of shelter 
— humpies made from tree branches and tussock grass, overhanging 
rocks, even caves. They graduate into tents as soon as possible, but 
anything more secure is a waste. When the gold runs out a miner must 
move on. 

some are very temporary camps. More permanent shelters have 
appeared at Damp Camp, Snakey Gully and Deep Mountains. Initially 





15 


the settlements stretch along a creek bed where miners can wash their 
dirt. The land around a new camp changes quickly. Trees are cut, 
claims are pegged and tents are erected. At first everyone fossicks and 
pans with dishes. Within a few days of a strike, thousands of miners 
arrive and a tent settlement springs up, with diggers working furiously 
everywhere. 

The diggers identify their tents and hovels by names painted on 
boards or by coloured flags. One is called Buckingham Palace. Not 
to be outdone, a shabbier residence is called Windsor Castle! Nearby 
are Westminster Abbey and the House of Lords. 

Stories and news race through the camps — there are tales of success 
and of hardship, and of miners who have eaten £10 notes in mutton 
sandwiches, or used fivers to light cigars. There are stories about 
diggers who have had horseshoes and harnesses made of gold. Others 
have paid for delicacies with bags of gold dust .. . or have they? No 
one knows what is truth and what is not. 

Night at Snakey Gully is a crazy experience. It is almost impossible 
to find your way through the camp. Move carefully, or, better still, 
stay in your tent. Revolvers crack; a man with a broken leg groans; 
drunken miners yell; others sing songs — different songs, and to 
different tunes. One man is heard shouting because he could not find 
the way to his hole, while another screams because he has fallen into 
his. 

I never venture from my tent, night or day, without a loaded 
revolver, and I always sleep with it beside me. A drunk, hell-hound 
or madman might attack at any time, but, I repeat, it is best not to 
stir at night. Still, I suppose the danger gives some glamour to a dingy 
mudfield. 


Pegging a Claim 


Numerous miners will race off to peg a claim at the vaguest rumour 
of a new strike. Sometimes a false report might be circulated. One 
digger told me he was the victim of a hoax, and ran four miles after 
other fortune seekers. It was all in vain. 

Peg your claim with stakes. Cover an area about 12 feet square 
(roughly 4 metres square), as this is all any digger is allowed. Initial 
the stakes, then connect them with rope. The area is not large, but 
big enough to dig down, then perhaps along. You may have to defend 
your claim — claim-jumpers sometimes use force to try to take a piece 
of dirt. You can expect little help from the law on isolated or crowded 
diggings. 


16 


Rn” Se 
ts 


ah 





x 
Cegh a 


ng 


ee Se es 





» 


~~ 


“3 


eg 
le 


bee: 
< 
- 


. 
> 


Don yit 


; pes er Ly ty: 


SO NE A ap PO 


ER EDMER IO OS 
4 +O yn 
LISTUBIOS E Pe f 7, 
L702 : 


Panning for gold 


Figure 7 


17 


How to Pan for Gold 


If you are alone or in a small group, you should hunt for surface 
gold. To pan, either dig some earth from near the river and add a little 
water, or take a scoop from the riverbed. Swirl the mixture round until 
the sand is suspended in water, then carefully tip out the water and 
suspended dirt. Only the heaviest grains will sink to the bottom, and 
any gold will be in this residue. This process is simple and cheap, but 
slow, and other methods give better results. Poor diggers have been 
known to try washing for gold with a washbasin, saucepan or hat 
instead of a pan! 

In summer, if the creeks dry, some miners lug wash dirt over long 
distances to find water, while others pile up mined earth waiting for 
the winter rains. 


Operating a Cradle 


Cradling for gold usually takes more than one person. A cradle is 
a wooden box set on rockers. Inside are shelves set along its bottom, 
and these catch gold particles as the cradle is rocked. One miner rocks 
the cradle while another throws dirt and water inside. This is difficult 


ahi wise f : 
ee tee 5 + al, wf > 
ne ah ene Nh pet 
ig - i sm Pita 
we FE. at o Pade Sg 
ageeto “4 CS ates ee * 


a * 
xiv 
a 





Figure 8: Working a cradle 


18 


work. Mud can easily cover the shelves, so the cradle must be cleaned 
often if the gold is to be caught. Cradling is the easiest and surest way 
of finding gold, but never in such large quantities as are possible with 
shaft mining. 


Long Toms 


These are sluices, longer versions of cradles. They are used in areas 
with plenty of gold and water. A long tom can be as much as 24 feet 
(7.3 metres) long, eighteen inches (460 millimetres} wide, with foot 
(300 millimetre} high sides. Miners usually band together to operate 
a machine efficiently. 


Puddling 


Sometimes miners use a large wooden tub, filled with a mixture of 
dirt and water. A miner will stand there and puddle — that is swirl 
the contents with his spade, drawing muddy water to the top and 
leaving heavier deposits, including gold, on the bottom. 

The waste water is tipped out and the residual gravel is put in the 
hopper, the top part of a cradle. 

There are puddling machines at large camps like Snakey Gully. 
Miners can rent the machine, which is a large circular washing tank 
powered by a horse. Watch closely. The owner puddles the diggers’ 
mud, so you must keep your eye on your piece of dirt! 


Reef Gold 


Not all gold is alluvial gold, which is close to the surface or in the 
rivers and is easy to get at. Reef gold is embedded in veins of quartz 
rock that must be crushed before the gold can be retrieved. One way 
to crush the ore is to put it in an iron cylinder and pound it with an 
iron bar. (Miners call this a dolly pot.) 

It is best to begin a shaft mine by forming a company and working 
with others, because it is very expensive. Shafts can be dug deep, 
straight through the topsoil to the pipeclay and slate beds beneath. 
Here is where the reef might be — usually 20 to 100 feet (6 to 30 metres} 
down. When a hole is “bottomed”, horizontal tunnels (drives) are dug. 
Sometimes there are so many drives that two miners tunnel into each 
other, or cause each other cave-ins. 


19 


Operating a Shaft 


A timber windlass is built above the shaft entrance; that is, three 
fastened poles are tied together at the top. A block and tackle is hung 
and a rope and bucket are tied on. Diggers descend the shaft by earth 
footings (notches) and fill the bucket with washdirt. A mate hauls the 
bucket to the top. 


Dryblowing in Desert Areas 


Some gold areas have very low rainfall, and so diggers use dry- 
blowing. 

The earth is dug by pick and shovel, and smashed about until it is 
crumbled. Two iron dishes of about 18 inches (460 millimetres) 
diameter and 5 inches (130 millimetres} depth are used. An empty 
dish is put on the ground. The other, filled with worked earth, is held 
at arm's length above the head. The dish’s mouth is turned towards 
the wind so that light dust is blown away and heavier material is caught 
in the dish at your feet. This is done a number of times, exchanging 
the dishes. When only a little material remains, the dish is rotated 
to bring the lighter pieces to the top. These are picked out and thrown 
away. A compact heap remains. The digger checks for small nuggets; 
extracts them; then gently blows away the remainder. Any fine gold 
lies on the bottom, just under the prospector's nose. Cradles can be 
used for dryblowing, but the material must be properly crushed so 
that the shaker can separate gold from waste. 


Big Mines 


Some mines, like those in Deep Mountains, need many workers and 
plenty of money to run them. The mine and its machinery must be 
in safe working order. Big mines require timber supports, pumping 
systems to drain water, even rail trucks to move rock. Quartz may 
need to be carted to a stamping battery (a crushing machine), where 
miners pay to have the ore crushed under the steam-powered 
hammers. Because of the high costs of mining in such areas, large com- 
panies are taking over from diggers as the main extractors of gold. 
A lot of miners are beginning to work for these companies for wages. 
Some say that there will soon be no independently-owned shaft mines 
left in the area. 


20 





% i 3 BY. y ~~ Wr! 
4 ‘ me 4 ee. 4 . Hs 7 ‘ 
: ; 4 Bik, 3 it 4 tte a 


Figure 9: The final stage of dryblowing 


21 


Town Councils 


The larger towns, like Fields Town, have councils. You go to the 
council chambers to get licences, seek claims and lodge complaints. 
Attached to the chambers is the Council Office for white-collar officials 
and councillors who look after the public interest — roads, quality 
of water, vagabonds, fire control and hotel operation. The Mayor and 
councillors are chosen from the townspeople. Usually these people 
already have a business interest in the town. There's little chance that 
a poor digger or town worker would become a councillor; most are 
very well-heeled. 

Police inspectors and officers, although connected with the councils, 
are usually located in separate buildings at a police camp. Here there 
are barracks for the police adjoining the prisoners’ “logs”. 

A law court is held in the Fields Town council's main hall. There 
is no permanent judge presiding; a travelling magistrate hears cases 
once every month. Persons under arrest must wait in chains (or locked 
up) until the magistrate visits. 

Try to keep out of the jails. Pay a bribe if necessary, otherwise you'll 
rot until the magistrate arrives. Then, if you are found guilty, you could 
be on a chain gang, breaking up rocks to make buildings and pave 
roads. In court you have to speak for yourself against the police; there 
are few lawyers and they are ridiculously expensive. A fiver is a good- 
sized bribe for most troopers — and the best of luck to you. 


Crime and Grog Shops 


The grog shops offer some relief to tired, lonely diggers. Some 
become fighting drunk, but most just relax. Grog shops are illegal, but 
most are protected by the police — for a fee. One is run by a woman 
who took four days pushing a wheelbarrow to get to the fields. In the 
wheelbarrow she had a washing-tub full of bottles. When she arrived, 
hundreds of diggers surrounded her tent for grog. They say her tent 
burns down regularly, but she replaces it and the sales continue. 

Most people happily tolerate the grog sellers and licence dodgers, 
and you seldom hear any criticism of the bushrangers. After all, they 
only rob the government's money -— the gold is stolen after the diggers 
have exchanged it for cash. You'll hear plenty of miners laughing about 
joining the bushrangers to “get their own back" on the police. 

Everyone feels differently about tent robbers, claim-jumpers and 
murderers. Harming your fellows is deeply despised. Diggers take the 
law into their own hands; there would be many unmarked graves in 


22 


the bush because of murders and reprisals that leave no evidence. 
“Candle-lighters"”, who sleep by day and loot washdirt by night, could 
expect to be tarred and feathered at the least. Others are treated more 
harshly. The Angus reported a case where two miners quarrelled over 
the division of their gold. “An observer spotted a gathering of bushflies 
and a trickle of blood on the earth under a stretcher. The onlooker 
bailed up the murderer, attracting a crowd of miners. They found a 
bloodstained axe and a head. The diggers neglected to drag the offender 
to the authorities. They fetched a rope and dangled him between 
heaven and earth.” 


Goldfields Women 


Many women have been on the fields from the beginning, although 
there are still a lot more men than women here. Panning and cradling 
is often a family affair, while some women run shops. Others make 
clothes or are nurses. Many are astute businesswomen. In fact, they 
are free women doing similar work to the men, quite unlike the pam- 
pered ladies in the cities. 


Chinese 


The diggers come from every part of the world. You might find a 
Yankee fiddler in a hotel one night, a German band the next and a 
bagpiper the night after that. In crowded places you hear different 
languages all around you, but most realise that a person's worth 
depends on more than the way he speaks. Trouble between different 
nationalities is rare, except in the case of the Chinese miners. 

These people keep to themselves and perhaps this is why many 
diggers distrust them. They were encouraged to come to this country 
to provide cheap labour, but since the discoveries they have flocked 
to the fields. They prefer to live in huts made of stone, clay or wood, 
definitely not tents. They certainly look different, dressed in long blue 
tunics and baggy trousers, sporting pigtails (which are kept so they 
may reach heaven}, broad mushroom straw hats and long poles on 
which they carry their loads. The Chinese often fossick in abandoned 
mullock heaps, where they find specks of gold left by previous miners. 

They are quick to make the best of an opportunity. Word has it that 
a small mud brick hotel stood near one camp — the "Golden Shanty”. 
The owner had scraped earth from a creek bed to build it. He couldn't 
understand why, years later, the bricks started disappearing. Chinese 


23 


fossickers had realised the mud bricks might hold alluvial gold. The 
place was eventually demolished right under the owner's nose. 

The Chinese even work on Sunday, the diggers’ day of rest. This 
infuriates many diggers — the comradeship of the goldfields does not 
extend to the Chinese. There has been open hostility, but gradually 
the Chinese are being accepted. 

Lin Wu is one of a growing number of Chinese who prefer to set 
up a business. Lin has grown a vegetable garden outside Fields Town 
and is marketing his produce on the goldfields. Previously there were 
no fresh fruit or vegetables, and so this looks to be a surer way of 
making money than mining. 


Squatters 


I would prefer to forget most of the “landed gentry” that I've met. 
They do not like the strains and changes being brought about by the 
goldrushes. They complain about miners digging up their land (land 
which is, in fact, owned by the government). They complain about 
the lack of farm hands (whom they underpay}. They seem to want 
life to provide the best and most profit only for themselves. However, 
they are brave men and women who have made a success of a hard 
life in a hard land. They are the ones who have explored and opened 
up most of the country. They wield great power in politics because 
of their money and have considerable influence in the colony. 


Are You a Miner? 


Many prospective diggers are entirely unsuited to the hardships of 
gold mining. Can you endure these trials? Can you work harder than 
a navvy? Can you live in a bush hut made of sticks and leaves, with 
rain pouring through in winter? Can you suffer summer under the 
burning sun, eaten by flies during the day and plagued by mosquitoes 
and fleas at night? Are you strong enough to work through rain, hail, 
sun or snow, eating fly-blown mutton and damper made from sour 
flour? Can you drink water so thick with mud that a spoon can stand 
up in it? Will you dig fresh holes week after week, month after month, 
finding just enough gold to buy food? Can you protect your gold from 
cut-throats? You will endure all this and more while you wait to make 
your strike — and your strike may never come. 


24 







Be i ES any he TS 


Re es erereor. PE oe Bh gousne os 


ie 
ed 


% 
es 


De still Te 
i 





a Sr peters 












¥ 
‘ 
x MOH oF VR ye ae wt 2 
PTE Rete ea i a 4 
Phat Gevg? SG re i 
, bd rs aden z x, 
} ¢ 
3 Fk 
% ba RE LON 
} : ve ‘ wv 2 
‘ e : 
tg e 













pT pene 


tas. 
ei 


. tt nt prt tht OD EEOC LOPES 


a ee 


Ro, ox ernie, 
9 
i ae . : 
a 





i G: we 


<< % eer id 


Sees 





ite ee phi 
Z 
“o 


Zz 
. 
4 


2? 
25 ¢ 
hoiey Leia 


uk Fe 
in, 


in mt 


Se 


; eae . i Mis ‘ : a ae eke * an OS i 


DY ane 
te mies 


The followin YG UTTA PERCH A ARTI CLES ‘will be found of grea at acu 
: smigrants, especially auch as are proceeding to the. 











EINES Sm! 1, Me ennneves Syd, ind PMS 


HA LINING FOR ‘BOXES. 
BU Ab E-BUOYS. WASHING BOW’ 
DRINKING-MUGS.. | - FLASKS. «SYPHON. 
GUTTA PERCHA TUBING. 
SUCTIONS FOR PUMPS. | CARBOYS FOR GUNPOWDER, 
JUG. | MINERS’ CAPS, 


SOLES FOR BOOTS AND SHOES. 


OMNES a tl sen? 


PO KEEP THE FEET DRY is of the utmost importance to the Emi rent. 
This may be seeared by the use of Gatta Percha Soles, which are per faeths 
Waterproof, cheaser and more d urable than Leather, They ean be put on with 
ease by any one. This cannot be too extensively known amongat nats i 
Emicrants, as it a vow diffieult to find a Shoemaker i inthateountry, 9... 

Gold-washing Vessels of every variety of shape may be had te order. 

Directions tofmigrants for lining Boxes with Gutta. Pertha “Sheet {80 28 
preserve the ententa from injury hy Bea-water), also £r puitl ng on Boles 
Boots and. Show, &e., may. be had GRATIS on applica i mn to any of | ates $x 
Percha Compan’s Dealers. : | ae = 


The Gutta Posha Compa 3 ny Patente is 








veipeeeans 














Tp 


x gor 















pot 





25 














