Goldfields 





Jacaranda! Teacher’s Guide 
Software Trevor K. Jacob 


CAP 
43! 


First published 1986 by 

JACARANDA SOFTWARE 

65 Park Road, Milton, Qld 4064 

140A Victoria Road, Gladesville, N.S.W. 2111 
90 Ormond Road, Elwood, Vic. 3184 

4 Kirk Street, Grey Lynn, Auckland 2, N.Z. 


Typeset in 10/11pt Triumvirate Lignt 


Printed in Australia by 
Watson Ferguson & Company, Brisbane 


Reprinted in Australia 1987 
© Trevor K. Jacob 1986 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, 
or otherwise, without the prior permission of 

the publisher. 


Acknowledgments 


The author and the publishers wish to thank the following for per- 
mission to reproduce photographs and etchings in A Goldfields 
Journal: the Battye Library of West Australian History for photo- 
graphs Ib 7271 (Figure 3), 4718 P (Figure 4), 816B/TB 4183 
(Figure 5), 816B/TB 3987 (Figure 6) and 20062 P (Figure 9), and 
the New South Wales Department of Mineral Resources for the 
etchings tn Figures 1, 7 and 8. 


Guidelines 
General information 


Goldfields contains the following components: 
a floppy disk, 
a Teacher's Guide containing 

guidelines and 

suggested activities, 
a copy of A Goldfields Journal, 
black line masters of 

a key words summary sheet, 

a diary sheet and 

a sheet with a bank draft and three share certificates, 
a poster with a map and getting started information on tt. 
Note: Teachers can copy the Goldfields Journal, the black line 
masters and the program disk only for use in the educational insti- 
tution for which they were purchased. In these circumstances, 
no payment for copying is required by the publisher. It is recom- 
mended that you keep the original disk for backup and use a 


Copy. 
Introduction 


Goldfields simulates a nineteenth century goldrush— players can 
make decisions in situations consistent with the place and time. 
Similar rushes took place in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and 
the United States of America, although Goldfields uses a lot of 
Australian idiom. 


The names of people and places in Goldfields may be fictional, 
but the situations are based on fact. 

Although Goldfields may be used in isolation from normal 
school programmes (it is an enjoyable game in its own right), its 
best application is when incorporated with a carefully planned 
unit on gold. 

Goldfields is primarily intended for use in upper primary and 
lower secondary social studies classes, but cross-curricula studies 
can be based on it. Possibilities exist for research, creative writing, 
drama, art, oral work and the development of some arithmetic 
Skills. 

Individuals or groups must plan to succeed in the environment. 
Where a group is playing, the members should discuss their ideas 
and clarify their reasons for making particular decisions. 


Aim of the program 


The aim of the game is to give students a “feel” for the social his- 
tory of the goldrushes. This is achieved by working in a gold- 
mining area. 

Students will need to 

read and comprehend text information and instructions, 
draw inferences from their own experiences and life skills, 
use experience and reading to improve results, 

make logical assessments of situations as they arise, 

take notes and recognise key words for later use, and 
discriminate between fact and fiction. 


About the program 


The players are “new chums’, recent arrivals at Suze Port, in the 
year 1854. Players are given a “year” to “make their fortune’ on 
the goldfields. Before beginning the simulation, the class should 
discuss the criteria for success — the computer makes no judg- 
ment. After a “year”, players can obtain a summary of their 
experience and posessions and may continue for another year. 
students should develop an understanding of the concepts 
behind Goldfields when they are familiar with all aspects of the 
program. While subsequent games will show the benefits of 
experience, players can be successful and become wealthy in 


2 


the early stages if they read and research the Goldfields Journal 
carefully. 

Penniless, they first must reach the mining area. How do they 
get there? (It is a long walk.) What equipment do they take? 

Sections of the Goldfields Journal hold clues on survival. Some 
unpredictable things may happen — players should look after 
their health and try not to fall foul of the law. 

When seeking gold they may choose from various mining loca- 
tions, each with its own peculiarities. Sometimes there are rumours 
of a secret mine. 

lf the diggers find gold, they can exchange it for money, but 
exchange rates vary, depending upon one's location. 

In Fields Town there are opportunities for other work. Employ- 
ment is offered in the hospital, at the store, in the hotel or at the 
market gardens just out of town. 


The kitty 


This is an information screen that records a miner's fortunes and 
misfortunes throughout the game. It is inspected by entering “@” 
at any time. The kitty lists all gold and money held, the exchange 
rate of the day, and any equipment and property owned. It also 
notes a player's experiences, including a resume of health and 
legal status (honest, petty criminal, etc.). 

A summary of kitty information appears at the bottom of most 
screens. 


Prerequisites 


Goldfields is suitable for anyone who might be interested in the 
place gold mining occupies in our history. School children might 
study this topic as early as year 5 (about age 10), studying more 
sophisticated concepts in later years. 

As the program is experiential, students who are unfamiliar with 
the historical background will not be handicapped. They can still 
participate and pick up (or deduce) information from the program 
and the documentation. 

students should also be able to 
e start the program (disk) 
e¢ know the location of significant keys and the SPACE BAR, and 
e enter text and press the RETURN key when required. 


Playing time and saving 


Play continues for one year (365 days) and can be extended for 
a second year. The game can be saved at any stage and re- 
sumed later. To save a game, enter @ and select C (save the 
game) from the menu. An identification number shows on the 
screen; players must write this down. 

Although there is an option to play for a second year, it is recom- 
mended that players begin a new game so they can experiment 
with new situations and compare the results with former decisions. 
Thus players can improve their Goldfields experience. 


Teacher involvement 


Teachers need not provide specific help, because the program 
holds all the instructions required. Students are likely to learn more 
by making mistakes and correcting them than by being guided. 
Adult help might be needed when students are consulting the 
Goldfields Journal, particularly sections containing new words and 
concepts. 


Activities section 


The teacher directed activities are contained here in two sections: 
e overview 1 (primary and secondary), 
e overview 2 (for secondary). 

The themes chosen for both overviews are orientated towards 
Social Studies; however, the majority of sample activities are inter- 
disciplinary, ready for modification to suit particular programme 
needs. Both overviews are divided into four sections: 

e information objectives (general understanding), 
e skills objectives, 

e values objectives, 

e sample activities. 


Ideas for enrichment 


These extension activities are included to provide guidelines for 

activities in two areas: 

e descriptive and interpretive skills for photographs and 
drawings; 


e further insight (or empathy) as students reflect on and justify 
what they would have done if confronted with certain situations. 


Overview 1 
‘People and events of the past influence the way in which we live.” 


Information 

Note: The points in the information, skills and values sections 

correlate. 

1. Name or recognise the names of prominent goldfields perso- 
nalities. 

2. Name or recognise the names of important gold-mining towns 
and locations. 

3. Place the discovery of gold in its historical context (e.g., com- 
pare the times of the West Australian and Queensland rushes 
with those in Victoria and New South Wales, and note any 
differences this made). 

4. Appreciate aspects of life peculiar to the gold era. 

5. Understand the importance of gold discoveries to local areas 
and the nation. 

6. Name or recognise current significant mining locations (gold 
and other). 


Skills 

1. Research and note taking, biography writing. 

2. Research, map identification, terrain and climate indicators. 

3. Research and time-line construction — (a) gold related to sig- 
nificant historical events in Australia, (b) important events per- 
taining only to gold. 

4. List key words. Generalise about goldfields life: travel, dress, 
camps, etc. 

5. Discuss and list the short and long term results: political, eco- 
nomic, demographic, social and enviromental. 

6. Locate existing mining towns. Note their type, inception and 
growth. 


Values 

1. Are these characters worth a place in history? How much is 
folklore? 

2. Was gold good for towns? List beneficial and detrimental 
affects. 


3. Justify gold’s place in our history compared with that of con- 
victs, squatters, land-settlement schemes, exploration and 
immigration. 

4. Did any aspects of goldfields life create permanent changes? 

5. Did the positive results of the discovery of gold outweigh the 
negative results? 

6. Do modern mining towns have their own peculiarities and 
problems? 


Sample activities 
1. Life on the goldfields can be discussed/researched under 
various headings: 
transport — the roads, vehicles, distances, costs, suppliers, 
stock (remembering the camels used in the desert): 
supplies — transportation, expense, food, equipment, water, 


demand; 

medical facilities — disease, doctors, hospitals, bush 
medicine; 

mining — methods, difficulty, isolation, success, terrain, 
claims; 


camps — work, housing, supplies, law, recreation, popula- 
tions, mateship; 

law — licences, crime, justice, mateship, officials; 

towns — business, facilities, growth. 

2. How did alluvial and shaft workings differ’. 

3. Who benefited by the discovery of gold? Gold benefited 
which sections of society, in what way? Explain from some 
of the following points of view: farmer, miner, policeman, 
banker, squatter, exporter/importer, butcher, priest, labourer, 
convict. 

4. List some of the problems caused by gold. Rank them in 
order of importance to you. Compare your results. 

5. Immigrants were attracted by gold discoveries. Write an 
essay from a new arrival’s point of view: 

Who are you? 

Where are you from? 

What problems confront you? 
List your aims/hopes. 

Will you stay in this country? 
Why? 


10. 
11. 


12. 


. Write an obituary, radio story or short story about a real gold- 


fields personality. Include reference to their contribution and 
why they appeal to you. 


. Make up ashort story using a fictional character but real loca- 


tions, things and possible events from the goldrush days. 


. Which townships have developed due to the presence of 


minerals? Use a map (with title, key, scale and labels) to 
locate places and activities. 


. What minerals have been discovered more recently in Aus- 


tralia? Include dates on the various mineral deposits (perhaps 
use an overlay to mark those workings that have closed 
down). 

What is the land in former gold mining areas used for now? 
Discuss the concept of a “ghost town’. From a list of key 
words, write about a gold “boom town’ and its disappear- 
ance some years later. (Croydon in Queensiand might make 
an interestin’~ study. From a population of around 40 000 
in the early twentieth century it has shrunk to around 100 
inhabitants. White ants have destroyed most traces of the 
town; only the shafts and iron lie in the bush.) 

The following titles are some of the classic Australian stories 
written about goldfields life: 

The Loaded Dog, 

The Golden Shanty, 

The Chinaman’s Ghost. 


Overview 2 


‘AS societies grow, they develop certain characteristics. These 
characteristics are strongly influenced by a society's natural 
environment.” 


Information 


Note: The points in the information, skills and values sections 
correlate. 


1. 
2. 
3. 


some characteristics or images of Australians are traditional 
ones, others modern. 

Assess the influence gold discoveries had on the develop- 
ment of Australia and Australian society. 

Hardships and privation helped foster mateship and an 
independent spirit amongst miners. 


4. 
5. 


1 
2. 


Skills 


Australia is mainly a country of recent immigrants (the last 200 
years). 

The natural environment helped determine the character of 
the mining and gold seekers. 


Collate evidence from magazines, newspapers, poetry, prose 
and family history. 

List positive and negative factors. From a time-line, relate the 
importance of the gold era to other times and industries; e.g., 
pastoral, industrial, convicts, land settlement. 


. Research life in the mining fields, difficulties with the law, 


miners’ rights and the Eureka Stockade. 


. Find magazine, pictorial and other evidence to show the mix 


of cultures. Research immigration figures. 
In what sort of terrain and geographic locations were the major 
gold discoveries made? 


Values 


a ae 


2. 


Does a typical Australian exist? 

Was the influx of people a good thing? 

Was the rebellion at Eureka justified? 

Have there been immigrations of people of different national- 
ities, in stages, at various times? Have there been changing 
prerequisites for immigrants? Who should be allowed to 
migrate? 

Why will people undergo extreme hardship in the search for 
gold? 


Sample activities 


1. 


2. 


How do we describe a typical Australian today? Have we 
changed over the years (1850s, 1915, 1956, now)? 
Make an advertisement to portray the typical Aussie to 
people overseas. Include ideas on food, drink, clothes, phy- 
sique, phrases, entertainment, religion, cars, houses, sports, 
work. Is there any conflict in choice? 

What is the image portrayed by some of the characters In 
the following: 

The Man From Snowy River, 

Waltzing Matilda, 

cricket and football teams, 

bushranger stories, 


10. 


11. 


12. 


Dad and Dave, 

The Man From Ironbark, 

the political arena? 

Discuss other images portrayed in modern films, and by 
business people and people in the spotlight. Is the typical 
Australian now a city (or cosmopolitan) character, rather than 
country? 

Review urbanisation in Australia. How many people are 
urban? Map the population density, describe and account 
for the pattern. How has it changed from the gold days? 
Look at the influence of immigrants in our history. Research 
the waves of migration and discuss the truth of the state- 
ment “Australia is a nation of migrants.’ 

Using pictorial or written evidence (newspapers, telephone 
book, statistics, photographs, surveys) present information 
about the influence of other cultures in Australia. 

People reacted to news of gold discoveries in different ways. 
Give your opinion on how some of the following might have 
reacted: 

a city baker, 

an unemployed labourer, 

a Chinese immigrant, 

a city landlord, 

an old doctor, 

a teacher, 

a newly arrived sailor, 

a Clerk's wife (with son aged 6), 

an importer/exporter. 

What was a miner's licence? What did it cost? Why was it 
introduced? Was its introduction necessary? What part did 
the licence fee play in the Eureka Stockade? Are miner's 
licences still purchased today? Why? 

Accurately reproduce the flag of the Eureka miners. 
Describe it in words. Where, and for what reasons, Is the 
flag in use today? 

How well were Chinese and/or Afghan immigrants accepted 
on the goldfields? 

Discuss the difficulties that Vietnamese, Yugoslavian, Italian, 
Lebanese or English immigrants might have in settling here. 


9 


13. 
14. 


Comment on the relative difficulties each of these nationali- 
ties have in mixing. List some of the advantages and dis- 
advantages each might have. 
In what ways did miners “stick up” for, or help each other, 
in the camps and goldfields? 
Does gold have real value? What is meant when it is said 
that gold has no “intrinsic” value? Why is gold worth so 
much? How do we use gold? 


Enrichment 
imagine that... 


ie 


You are eleven years old and have been taken to the Ballaarat 

goldfields by your father; there were no other relations you 

could live with. Your father is either (choose one) 

a miner, 

a storekeeper, or 

a policeman. 

He is very busy working to provide food and shelter for you 

both. There are only a few children and women at the 

diggings. 

(a) Describe the work your father does on any day. 

(b) Are you likely to go to school? Explain. 

(c) Describe what you would do during the day. 

(d) Describe your food, clothes and other belongings. 

(e) Would it be fun for an eleven-year-old at the diggings? 
Why? 


. Imagine you are one of the many poor miners at the diggings. 


You cant afford the licence fee of thirty shillings each month. 

You continue to mine regardless of the consequences, are 

caught by police, fined, and, as you have no money, 

imprisoned. 

(a) Do you think this treatment is just? 

(b) Is a licence fee reasonable considering only a few might 
strike it rich? Explain. 

(c) Why do you think the licence fee was required? 

(d) Were the Eureka miners who objected and staged a rebel- 
lion wrong to oppose the law? 

(e) Was your decision to mine for gold a good one? Was it 
a responsible decision? 


3. You are a doctor in Suze Port. On hearing of the goldrush, 
you leave your patients and head for Goldfields to mine. 
(a) List reasons why you should and why you should not go. 

Consider that there were few doctors available at the time. 
(b) What would happen to your patients if you chose to go? 
(c) How would you travel to the diggings? What sorts of 
characters would you meet there? 
(d) When you returned after two years, how would you feel 
about treating the same patients you had left behind? 


Notes for BBC network managers 


Goldfields can easily be networked. 

The files on the disk are as follows: 

IBOOT An EXEC file 
INTRO, SUZE, TRAVEL, MUIR, 

FTOWN, MINING, END id i. sale 
STOF, MAP screen data files 

All these should be transferred to a directory. If the directory 
is $.GOLD, and a user called GOLD is created, with start-up 
option set by “OPT 4,3 to EXEC, then logging on by *| AM GOLD 
will run the software exactly as on the disk version. 

PAGE is set to &1100 by this software, which is lower than usual 
for the network, but the software will still run properly. Remember 
to press BREAK after using the software. On some networks (for 
example if ANFS chips are being used), it may be necessary to 
press CONTROL-BREAK (or else a “Bad net checksum’ error will 
be given). In this case, the user will probably find that he or she 
needs to log on again. 

lf the files are put in a directory as described, the user will have 
ownership of all the files. In this case, the saving and loading of 
games will happen exactly as on the disk version. However, only 
15 games may be saved and there is no check against different 
users picking the same game number (in which case only the 
last game with that number will be saved). The files containing 
saved games are called GAMEO1 to GAME15. The manager 
may, of course, rename these files, or move them to a different 
directory, thus allowing more games to be saved. The files must 


11 


be restored to their original names before being loaded when 
a player wants to resume a game. 

Many managers choose to put software on public access (LR/R) 
in directories which users do not own, to guard against accidental 
or malicious interference with files. In this case, game-saving will 
not work as the user is not permitted to save in the current direc- 
tory. An “insufficient access’ error will be given and the program 
will continue. 

Managers wishing to alter the software to allow game-saving 
while still not giving users ownership of the software are welcome 
to do so. Remember to keep a backup! The loading of games 
is done in the “SUZE" program only, and routines exist in SUZE, 
FTOWN, MINING and END for saving games. These saving rou- 
tines are almost identical (but note the different setting of A% in 
each case). Possible alterations would be (1) changing directory 
to the user's own directory for saving and loading, then returning 
to the GOLD directory, or (2) removing the restriction to fifteen 
saved games. 


Getting started on the... 


Apple 


1. Put the Goldfields disk (label side up) in the disk drive. (Do 
not shut the door of the drive yet.) 

. owitch on the monitor. 

. owitch on the computer. 

. When the red light on the disk drive is glowing, shut the drive 
door. 

. The Goldfields title screen will soon appear. Once that has 
happened, press the SPACE BAR to start the program. 


BBC 


1. Switch on the monitor. 
2. Switch on the computer. 
3. Put the Goldfields disk in the disk drive and shut the drive door. 


oO & G NO 


12 


. Hold down the SHIFT key and press the BREAK key; then 


release the BREAK key before taking your finger off the SHIFT 
key. 


. When the program has loaded, the title screen will appear. 


Press the SPACE BAR to start the program. 


Commodore 64 


“i o> O1 & GN — 


. Switch on the computer. 

. owitch on the monitor. 

. Switch on the disk drive. 

. When the red light on the drive goes out, put the disk (label 


side up) in the disk drive and shut the door. 


. Type LOAD “GOLD*«’,8: (Don't forget the colon.) 
. Hold down the SHIFT key and tap the RUN/STOP key. 
. After a few minutes, the title screen will appear. Press the 


SPACE BAR to start the program. 


. Put the DOS (master) disk in Drive A; switch on the computer 


and monitor. If the computer is already switched on, hold 
down the CTRL, ALT and DEL keys simultaneously. 


. When the computer asks for the time and date, just press the 


“enter” key. 


. When the A> prompt is showing, remove the DOS disk and 


replace it with the Goldfields disk. Type GOLD and press the 
“enter’ key. 


. When the title screen appears, press the SPACE BAR to start 


the program. 


Microbee 


1. 


Turn on the monitor. 


2. Turn on the computer. 

3. Put the master disk in the disk drive, label side up. (With a 
_ dual disk drive, put it in the one with the light on.) 

4. 

5 


When the A> prompt shows, remove the master disk and 
insert the Goldfields disk. Type “GOLD” and press RETURN. 


. When the title screen appears, press the SPACE BAR to start 


the program. 


13 


